---
title: "Bringing up the Bodies"
subtitle: "Towards a Corporeal Ethics of Music"
category: text
digest: "Writing in opposition to ideals of purity, distance and conceptual integrity, and in favour of materiality, diverse bodies, and the ethics that these imply."
---
for Tatiana Catanzaro

Arms bound, made visibly connected, increasingly constricted, one musician’s actions become the contingent restrictions on and conditions of another’s. Sivan Cohen-Elias’s *To Move You Stay* ends in a taut entanglement of limbs, moving through the space where one body affects the other, to the point of paralysis, every musician’s body held in check by others.[^1]

   [^1]:
      Cohen-Elias & Vertixe Sonora, *[To Move You Stay](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YKJ6Fj9mc3s)*.

      <iframe width="300" height="169" src="https://www.youtube-nocookie.com/embed/YKJ6Fj9mc3s?rel=0" frameborder="0" allowfullscreen></iframe>

The process of a binding together of musicians on stage, proceeding linearly towards the ever more restricted is a simple theatrical trajectory, a line to which local activity adheres, an overdetermining arc, but is also a gradual coming to presence of the body. A representation, perhaps, of paralysis, or of strict relation, but a *presentation* of the body as that which continuously emerges.[^2] The work of this music is the production and presentation of the body.

   [^2]: Nancy, *The Birth to Presence*, 2.

*Habeas corpus.*

### Nothing to see here, move along…

#### Caveat emptor

To begin the path I want to take, I will first construct what might seem like a straw man in order to demonstrate emphatically the need for what Stacy Alaimo and Susan Hekman have called a ‘material ethics,’ and ultimately — hybridising this with the work of Elizabeth Grosz — the need for a *corporeal ethics*. At times my arguments may appear exaggerated or overstated — polemical — but I maintain that this apparent straw man in fact exists. Its appearance as a straw man is symptomatic of its shadowy construction, its design as a reticent ruler, its preference to shape the world at a distance through well-intentioned allies, and the shock of having its contours pulled suddenly into the light.

#### The divisive cave

To produce the first body, lay claim to my right to seize it, I call Plato. He still has the dank musk of the cave in his beard but a gentle security officer has unshackled his ankles and a nurse carefully applied disinfectant with gauze and cotton wool to the sores left by his chains. He is blinking, but the sun is nowhere near as blinding as he predicted, the gentle hum of fluorescent lighting envelopes us.

The passages in the Republic that begin with the ‘Analogy of the Sun,’ continue with the ‘Analogy of the Divided Line,’ and finish with the ‘Allegory of the Cave’ provide to all intents and purposes the origin point of a long history of philosophical investigations that split the world into two parts: utter divisions of visible/intelligible, or material/ideal. ‘Plato has come to stand for the origin of a particular way of thinking that we could broadly call “western metaphysics,” characterized by its separation of truth from appearances and being from becoming.’ This separation is the basis for a privileging of the mathematical and the logical, over the material, that one finds in liberal doses throughout the western philosophical canon. It lies at the bedrock of our thought to such an extent that it becomes difficult to depart from its implications and metastases. Prefacing his attempt to critique what in his terms he saw as a ‘bifurcation of nature,’ Alfred North Whitehead wrote, ‘It is, perhaps, as well to state explicitly that if the reader indulges in the facile vice of bifurcation not a word of what I have here written will be intelligible.’ In other words, we have been so conditioned as to let the dualisms born of Plato’s cave become real, and our escape from their thrall — although it signifies neither an enlightenment nor a demystification — requires just as much struggle as the cave’s prisoners require as they are led ‘up the steep and rocky assent […] into the sunlight.’

Why the urgency in moving away from dualism? Pervasive Platonism reduces us to forever thinking things as essence/artifice, nature/culture, real/shadow, mind/body, and elevates the former of each of these pairs above its cave-dwelling counterpart. Bruno Latour has shown that the dualism of truth/appearance aligns continuously with dualism of nature/culture — that which Whitehead specifically addresses with his ‘bifurcation of nature.’ Regarding the dualism of mind/body, Rachel Jones writes of the ‘Allegory of the Cave’ in her exegesis of Luce Irigaray’s *Speculum of the Other Woman* that while

> the body passes fundamentally unchanged between the inside and the outside of the cave, the mind or soul of the prisoner does not: indeed, the whole point of the myth concerns the intellectual transformation produced by the journey. Thus, this aspect of the myth can be read as confirming the Platonic division between body and soul, according to which the body is ultimately inessential to the philosophical journey towards wisdom.

This denigration of the material and corporeal, construction of the false dichotomy of nature/culture, is the basis for Plato’s ideal republic, for political action and ultimately a dominant line of western metaphysics, but ‘the traditional alignment of woman and nature is cemented in the figure of the cave, the womb-like space/place that represents both the maternal body and the material world, and opposes both to the ideality of the Forms.’ Irigaray’s examination of the ‘Allegory of the Cave’ reveals its denial of sexual difference as it displaces our maternal origins and elevates the paternal line that descends from the true light of the son to the shadow on the wall cast by the cave’s dim fire. Platonism permits a continued elevation of the intellect over the body, legitimises an ongoing exploitation of the “natural”, and has been ‘so injurious — not only to nonhuman nature but to various women, Third World peoples, indigenous people, people of colour, and other marked groups.’ Whenever being is bifurcated in this way, it ‘is not simply a neutral division of an otherwise all-encompassing descriptive field. Dichotomous thinking necessarily hierarchizes and ranks the two polarized terms so that one becomes the privileged term and the other its suppressed, subordinated, negative counterpart.’ There is an undoubted urgency not in abandoning the cave — in the sense that we might universally bathe in the ideal — but in being without it entirely, recognising that *both* its in- and outsides are nowhere to be found.

#### Without the cave

If we wish to understand the world without the cave, redressing imbalances and injuries, how might we go about doing so? Here I would like to suggest that work grouped loosely under the label ‘material feminisms,’ but which has many precursors, tendrils and variations, might aid us in tackling the world with our newfound freedom. Material feminisms provide dynamic interpretations of the world by accepting to a large extent the achievements of poststructuralism’s linguistic turn, but arguing for a renewed engagement with the material of the world to counter poststructuralism’s continued repression of matter’s vital existence. In short, this is an argument for a hybrid apprehension of the world through a united body of language and matter. Matter is restored from its subaltern position as opposed to the Idea, and becomes a vital agent in the world. As Claire Colebrook writes:

> When feminists turn to vitalism today, they do so with a full sense of the exhaustion and limits of the linguistic paradigm. The idea that the world is constructed through language merely repeats a centuries-old privilege of the formal and logical over the material.

Susan Hekman makes a similar argument, following Latour, that  ‘what we need now is not a return to a modernist conception of reality as an objective given, but rather an understanding of reality informed by all we have learned in the linguistic turn.’

We must work hard to ensure we pay attention to matter. This work is not simply that of flipping a power relationship — ‘it is crucial not to reinscribe it in reversed or inverted form’ — but rather the work of building a dynamic and inclusive constitution of the world, which — as we saw above — does not only tackle the subaltern position of the female and the corporeal, but addresses injuries to a diverse variety of bodies.

#### The vital body

Inscribed at the head of this text is the goal of (re)introducing bodies to a discourse on music. Bodies feature here as particular assemblages of matter. They are not arbitrary distributions of intensity, but rather coalitions that have a political importance. Most evidently we will evoke the human body as the site of politics, as agent for and origin of change, but will also follow recent political arguments that assert the importance of nonhuman bodies in any progressive political settlement. To be clear, these bodies are neither metaphorical, nor linguistic, nor symbolic. They are overdetermined, inscribed upon, and socially constructed in many significant ways as demonstrated by a variety poststructural thinkers from Jacques Derrida to Judith Butler, but the bodies at stake here are nevertheless material bodies — bodies that matter. Their role in politics includes their susceptibility to injury and destruction, their fragilities, strengths, malleability, friability and every conceivable material contribution. They are soft and powerful. They are porous — always already in relation to other bodies.

They are not the bodies of Alain Badiou. Not ‘the body of the poem,’ nor of ‘the matheme,’ neither a ‘corporeal treatment of points.’ Badiou’s bodies belong to the Platonic order, a continued striving towards enlightenment through the *logos*, an exposition of Cartesian vertices as ersatz effigies of material bodies. In arguing for a material feminism Alaimo and Hekman tell us that ‘political decisions are scripted onto material bodies; these scripts have consequences that demand a political response on the part of those whose bodies are scripted.’ This is, if anything, the strongest argument of all for a theoretical approach that integrates matter into its discourse, and rejects Platonic dualisms. It has always been the prerogative of the body whose existence is unthreatened to declare its own nonexistence, or at least to relegate bodies to a secondary status and declare itself pure mind, leaving the many bodies subject to violences to deal with the matter of their precarious hold on the world. This move denies threatened bodies recourse to the one political response that is necessary and forceful — namely the direct move towards the establishment of rights and protections for their threatened bodies. Instead, the privileged subject who declares their enlightenment and elevated mind, demands of them to argue for these rights on its own terms, through the *logos*, through eternal Forms. By constructing a material ethics, we deny the division at the core of Platonism and address directly the material conditions of our existence, taking up ‘the wager […] that all the effects of subjectivity […] can be as adequately explained using the subject’s corporeality as a framework as it would using consciousness or the unconscious.’

Allied with the positive coming to presence of bodily matter, we find a reconfigured role for Spinoza’s vitalism in the work of several theorists, which permits us to understand agency in a more productive light and recognise the importance of process and becoming to a material ethics.

> The Spinozist account of the body is of a productive and creative body which cannot be definitively “known” since it is not identical with itself across time. The body does not have a “truth” or a “true nature” since it is a process and its meaning and capacities will vary according to context.

The concern with context and situatedness echoes a concern of ecological critiques, and forms a firm alliance with the work of Jane Bennett whose proposals for a ‘vibrant matter’ both provide a vitalist understanding of matter and present ways in which such an understanding can help us address politically the constitution of things, bodies, beings together in the world. Bennett makes it clear that such an understanding of vital bodies is not an exclusive, human-only affair. Instead she paints pictures of a wide range of entities engaged in exchange, action and counteraction. In just one example we are reminded of the political import of a material ethics for bodies affected by both human and nonhuman action (an example that makes extremely clear the importance of this project not only as feminist, but as a broader political contribution to the welfare of various human and nonhuman minority groups):

> Food will appear as actant inside and alongside intention-forming, morality-(dis)obeying, language-using, reflexivity-wielding, and culture-making human beings, and as an inducer-producer of salient public effects. We can call the assemblage formed by these human and nonhuman bodies “American consumption” and name as one of its effects the “crisis of obesity”.

By understanding the body as vital and real, as the site of political action, and acknowledging the need to dissolve dualisms as we encounter them, we can hope to build an artistic practice that does not make the mistake of indulging in brash Platonism, but that instead provides the opportunity for matter to matter. The artist should never dismiss the question ‘Where are the bodies?’ with a swift ‘Nothing to see–hear, move along… (all I have is eternal Forms).’ Burying the bodies in shame has a long lineage, but material ethics shows us its deficits.

*Habemus corpora.*

### Where are the bodies buried?

Given the approach laid out above, let us spend some time locating bodies in music and identifying the ways in which they have been buried, hidden, or relegated in importance at various sites. Where have we bifurcated our artistic worlds?

#### In the name of the father

Undoubtedly the most striking presence of a bifurcated world in music lies in the work concept that obtains for most of classical music, just as it does for a majority of contemporary and experimental musics. This concept, which can be traced back to the earliest ideas of the ‘absolute’ work of art, is that which locates the Work elsewhere, away from the material world, aligning it with the Ideal. Given what we have seen above, it should come as no surprise that to a great extent this distillation of the work into the ether is a product of what might be seen as the becoming linguistic of music — its rendering into a grammatical system of symbols allowed theorists to seize it off-guard and describe the act of performance as the carrying of the light from Plato’s fire to the cave wall. In this paradigm, performers attempt the role of the Philosopher King, crawling through the rocks towards enlightenment and returning to their cave-dwelling audience with their wisdom. (Worse: composers take on the role of Gods — think simply of Schopenhauer’s praise for music’s direct contact with the Will and this may seem less far-fetched.) Although the particular material divisions present in the score–performer–instrument assemblage leave it vulnerable to such accusations, it is not inevitable that notated music be read as a bifurcation placing the Work in the realm of the Ideal. However, it is this reading that became dominant and which, I would argue, remains powerfully operative in the field today.

This separation of the work from the world of matter permits us to summarise with ease the relationships of multiple performances. The complex aggregate of performers, spaces, instruments, atmospheric pressure, humidity, diet, acoustic properties, audience respiratory health, clothing, etc. in each of its specific material conjunctions is placed under the sign of the Work. Performances’ relationships remain eternally to the One, the Platonic Ideal of the Work, a tidy genealogy of Father and children. This reductive system relegates every body involved in the production of music. Because we are always in relation to the One, the specific co-ordinates and intensities of the bodies implicated can only ever be figured by their incapacities for full conveyance, never through their positive contribution to the world. Just as we saw above, one half of the bifurcation always ‘becomes the privileged term and the other its suppressed, subordinated, negative counterpart.’

#### Material ethics: first failure

At a cursory glance, John Cage’s *0'00"* may appear to address the Platonic work concept’s problems. Is it a modest request for us to abandon our fethisisation of scores? (There is after all so little substance to this sheet of paper inscribed with so few words.) To embrace indeterminacy and the agency of the performer? To have the Master Composer step back and open the door to excluded others? All Cage asks is that one ‘in a situation provided with maximum amplification (no feedback), perform a disciplined action.’ One might expect that Cage’s opening of the work would be a process by which the genealogical function of the work might be reduced and the material agencies involved in the work’s performance allowed to speak. However, for all the ostensible questions *0'00"* poses about the work concept, for which it might be lauded for effort, it is in fact perhaps the ultimate exemplar of a Platonic work.

In withdrawing its functioning from the material world yet maintaining its identity as a discrete entity, *0'00"* relegates the importance of the matter implicated in its performance, instead drawing attention only to its own Ideal form as a potentially infinite set, a glittering, infinitely-faceted withdrawn diamond, pure and unsullied by the dirt of bodies, always already away from the world. No matter what the performer does, they cannot disturb the distant and perfect world of the work. Like the diamond, *0'00"* is indestructible — eternal form.

By withdrawing from the work as he did here, Cage was not able to find a way of opening the Work to matter, but — perhaps surprisingly, perhaps unwittingly — finds himself headed in the other direction. It turns out that the more the artist attempts to withdraw from the work, to hold their hands in the air and declare their detachment from it, to invite all-comers in, the more the intensity of the Work as Ideal increases until it burns a fierce and authoritative demarcation upon every material instantiation such that the bodies instantiating it cannot be seen for its glow.

#### Form/material

It barely needs saying at this point that the discourse of musical material as pliable resource, available for elaborate human manipulation, through which it is given Form, is as evident a bifurcation as we are likely to encounter. Whenever one separates the supposed content of a work from its form, one repeats the fault of positioning the composer as the Father allied to the Form of His works, generating the cascade of bifurcations we have already encountered. Form is always immanent of music’s material — bodies, presences, a panoply of matter. ‘Music is not the conversion, translation, or restructuring of the natural, evolutionary order’s refrain into human musical notation, vocalization, or instrumentation, but the rendering sonorous of forces, ultimately the forces of chaos itself, that are themselves nonsonorous.’ This rendering sonorous of forces can only be accomplished through a coalition of allied bodies and force conversions, i.e. through material effort, never through the distant form-giving qualities of the Ideal.

#### Material ethics: second failure

This not the first time corporeality has entered the discourse of contemporary music. There is discourse that addresses a variety of music through the lens of the body, most notably first, the music of Brian Ferneyhough, and second, much more recent work by composers such as Raphaël Cendo, whose work has sometimes been grouped as ‘saturationist.’ In the case of Ferneyhough, the argument provided is that the great difficulty and virtuosity required to navigate his notated music forces performers’ bodies through stress and pressure, a process, which foregrounds their physical effort. In the case of Cendo, the argument for ‘saturation’ is for an aesthetics of excess, aligned with the distortion of the rock guitar, figured as the surpassing of a limit, the product of which is a viscerality diagnosed as otherwise lacking in music. With the second of these in particular it is notable that this visceral corporeality is aligned indisputably if implicitly in contradistinction to some other effete, effeminate music. In both cases, the introduction of the body to music is only capable of being affected with a great quantity of machismo and bravura — an embarrassment of the body covered by a show of noise, grunting, and athletic, archetypally male physicality. The idea that excess produces the body is incommensurate with a material ethics. The fascination with the limit and its transgression is the fascination of those without a body, whose limit is transgressed only ever Ideally, who do not possess a body, the fragility of which is *really* exposed to material limits and violences.

### Bringing up the bodies

In building this polemic, I have smashed several effigies in order to bring us emphatically to this point, where we might address together what can be done and what is to be done. In beginning this proces, I cited a work by Sivan Cohen-Elias, but — for all the declarations of categorical failure and the holding of Plato and other bodies culpable — there cannot be an ideal work that will exemplify the ethics towards which we are headed. We must always revise, adapt, unwork and rework matter and our material relations.

#### Towards a corporeal ethics

Having railed against the work concept for its fixing, objectificatory function, we must discover a way to be in relation that does not fix, but rather always circulates and revises. Above we have spoken of a ‘material ethics,’ an approach Alaimo and Hekman detail the appeal of in that it allows us to shift the focus from ethical principles to ethical practices. Practices are, by nature, embodied, situated actions. Ethical practices, which unfold in time and take place in particular contexts, invite the recognition of and response to expected as well as unexpected material phenomena. Particular ethical practices, situated both temporally and physically, may also allow for an openness to the needs, the significance, and the liveliness of the more-than-human world. Ethical practices — as opposed to ethical principles — do not seek to extend themselves over and above material realities, but instead emerge from them, taking into account multiple material consequences.

This statement sums up the need for our approach to be situated, adaptive, non-foundational, belonging to and not seeking to encompass or dominate matter. The appeal for practices over principles foregrounds the importance of becoming (that which used to be bifurcated from being) in that it specifically demands the continuous revision of its status in relation to others. A practice is only possible when situated within a world, it requires material conditions, and it is never a question of the eternal or the Ideal, but always the in-process. ‘A practice is always a labour — a “work” — on pre-existing materials and traces.’

If we are intent on ethical practices, we must be open and sensitive to the world and to the potential for change. If we acknowledge the political need for the reaffirmation of the material and corporeal as we have done, we acknowledge the need for change and declare ourselves allies in practising an ethics that is susceptible to change. Investigating the possibility of a corporeal alliance with the theory of Charles Darwin, Elizabeth Grosz suggests we might find there ‘in quite developed if not entirely explicit form, the elements of an account of the place of futurity, the direction forward as the opening up, diversification, or bifurcation of the latencies of the present, which provide a kind of ballast for the induction of a future different but not detached from the past and present.’ In pursuing evolutionary theory for an understanding of corporeal relationships and possibilities for change in the world, we can conceive of a theory of becoming and newness that does not require incommensurate rupture at every step. Rather: ‘the new is the generation of a productive monstrosity,’ deviation from a prevailing model or norm, but never a totalised mutation that could sunder two points entirely. The evolutionary body is equipped with an adaptive practice from which we might learn.

#### A more complete conclusion should really be here

Dear Michael,
I am very sorry. It is 5am CET, 16 December 2014 / 8pm PST, 15 December 2014. Having made you read this far I should have had the courtesy to construct a tighter conclusion at this point. However, it is not forthcoming at this point and although I glimpse some rays of light (not the sunrise, it is December), I suspect pushing wildly on will only muddy the waters. Below are some fragments and additional citations that may or may not find their way into my ultimate conclusion. Read into them what you will.
If you permit me, I’ll get a completed version to you as soon as possible, but a deadline is a deadline, and I wanted to be sure to have given you something.
Best, Chris.
Elsewhere, Grosz draws on Deleuze and Guattari’s work to address the functioning of art, to ask if she can ground it in the body…
Deleuze & Guattari, chaos, chaosmos, virtual
‘Chaos, the virtual in all its entwined complexity, can be understood as the ongoing possibility of infinite planes, or the plane of all planes that is the condition of every work and the ability of each work to somehow address the others with which it copopulates the plane.’
‘an ontology of music, looking at music's most elementary relations to chaos and to what all of life somehow extracts from chaos — a sense of the body and the earth’

### Bibliography

- Alaimo, Stacy, and Susan J. Hekman, eds. *Material Feminisms*. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 2008.
- Alaimo, Stacy, and Susan J. Hekman. ‘Introduction: Emerging Models of Materiality in Feminist Theory.’ In Alaimo & Hekman, *Material Feminisms*, 1–19.
- Bennett, Jane. *Vibrant Matter: A Political Ecology of Things*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2010.
- Cage, John. *0'00": Solo to Be Performed in Any Way by Anyone*. New York: Henmar Press, 1962.
- Cendo, Raphaël. ‘Les paramètres de la saturation.’ In *Franck Bedrossian: de l’excès du son*, edited by Pierre Roullier. Champigny sur Marne: Ensemble 2e2m, 2008.
- Cohen-Elias, Sivan, and Vertixe Sonora Ensemble. *To Move You Stay*. YouTube video, 10:53, from a performance on September 25, 2012, posted by ‘Sivan cohen elias,’ February 6, 2013, <https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YKJ6Fj9mc3s>.
- Colebrook, Claire. ‘On Not Becoming Man: The Materialist Politics of Unactualized Potential.’ In Alaimo & Hekman, *Material Feminisms*, 52–84.
- Gatens, Moira. *Imaginary Bodies: Ethics, Power, and Corporeality*. London: Routledge, 1996.
- Grosz, Elizabeth. *Chaos, Territory, Art: Deleuze and the Framing of the Earth*. New York: Columbia University Press, 2008.
- Grosz, Elizabeth. ‘Darwin and Feminism: Preliminary Investigations for a Possible Alliance.’ In Alaimo & Hekman, *Material Feminisms*, 23–51.
- Grosz, Elizabeth. *Volatile Bodies: Toward a Corporeal Feminism*. Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1994.
- Hall, Stuart. *Modernity and Difference*. London: Institute of International Visual Arts, 2001.
- Hekman, Susan J. ‘Constructing the Ballast: An Ontology for Feminism.’ In Alaimo & Hekman, *Material Feminisms*, 85–119.
- Jones, Rachel. *Irigaray: Towards a Sexuate Philosophy*. Cambridge: Polity, 2011.
- Latour, Bruno. *Politiques de la Nature: Comment faire entrer les sciences en démocratie*. Paris: Découverte, 1999.
- Latour, Bruno. *What Is the Style of Matters of Concern? Two Lectures in Empirical Philosophy*. Assen: Koninklijke Van Gorcum, 2008.
- Nancy, Jean-Luc. *The Birth to Presence*. Stanford: Stanford University Press, 1993.
- Tuana, Nancy. ‘Viscous Porosity: Witnessing Katrina.’ In Alaimo & Hekman, *Material Feminisms*, 188–213.
- Whitehead, Alfred North. *The Concept of Nature*. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971. First published 1920.
{: .bibliography}
