---
author: christopherlux
comments: true
date: 2009-02-16 21:54:30+00:00
layout: post
slug: lachenmann-in-stuttgart
title: »Der Komponist hat nichts zu sagen, er hat was zu schaffen«
wordpress_id: 708
categories:
- Musings
tags:
- Helmut Lachenmann
- Stuttgart
featured_image: 2009/02/CIMG1528.jpg
featured_image_alt: The Neckar river running through Stuttgart
---

#### Helmut Lachenmann in Stuttgart, 13.02.2009

I was visiting Stuttgart, hometown of composer [Helmut  Lachenmann](http://v2.chrisswithinbank.net/tag/helmut-lachenmann/), to hear a [concert](http://musik-am-13.de/musik-bachchor-cantus-stuttgart-programm-2008.php) of his music presented in the Stadtkirche of the suburb Bad-Canstatt.  It seemed like a good omen when, at the head of the menu in the  traditional Schwäbische Stube (I suppose this the local equivalent of an  American burger bar or an English tea shop) where we ate, I found a  John Cage quotation:

> I can't understand why people are frightened of new ideas. \\
> I'm  frightened of the old ones.

‘Fantastic, even the _dirndl_-wearing waitresses are familiar  with their avant-garde composers,’ I thought, tucking into creamy _spätzle_ and rich pork (nothing too new there then, Stockhausen would have been  disappointed).

Stuttgart is also the birthplace of G. W. F. Hegel and Max  Horkheimer, establishing its philosophical credentials, in a sense it is  the home of dialectical thinking. To potential Marxist chagrin however,  perhaps Stuttgart’s most famous products are cars, especially those  tending towards the luxurious (both Porsche and Mercedes originate  here). This is also the heartland of Lutheranism and Labour movements –  Lachenmann the latest in a long line of upright ‘L’s.

{% picture alignleft 2009/02/CIMG1535.jpg alt="Bezirksrathaus Bad Cannstatt next door to the church where the  concert was held" %}

On a cold evening I found the church hosting the concert early and  slipped inside out of the icy air. A few people had already gathered: a  group of white-haired ladies and a couple of eager young fans. On stage  sat Lachenmann deep in discussion with Ewald Liska, a composer, singer  and radio producer just two years Lachenmann’s junior, who would  interview the composer in between pieces during the concert. By the  advertised start time of 8 o’clock the church had filled, with an  audience of all ages spilling onto the balconies above – an enthusiasm  perhaps explained by the fact that this was, so to speak, a home crowd,  but nonetheless an enthusiasm difficult to imagine on English shores for  Harrison Birtwistle or Robin Holloway, for example. Nor is Stuttgart a  cultural desert. That evening Kristjan Järvi was conducting the  Radio-Sinfonieorchester Stuttgart in a programme of Bernstein,  Rachmaninov and – as is the laudable wont of German orchestras – a  premiere: a percussion concerto entitled _Industrial_ by  43-year-old Moritz Eggert.

At 73, Lachenmann is an elder statesman of the avant-garde music  scene. Since the death of Stockhausen, some see him as the de facto  leader of new music in Germany, but he was never cut out for leadership.  Lachenmann’s music is nothing if not subversive and the wry glint in  his eye as he speaks hints at a deep-rooted wish to upset the amassed  applecarts of the Western classical tradition. However, this is never an  aimless drive to destruction but a keenly focused and thoroughly  analytic examination of convention and how it must change – how it can  be rescued from the ‘orgy of stupefaction’ that is the everyday. All  very conceptual, perhaps, but the music is beautiful and the  transformations it subjects its listeners and performers to are  undeniable, matched only by Lachenmann’s technical brilliance in  building beguiling and dramatic structures through pure processual  transformations of sound material.

It is rare to see Lachenmann still perform at the piano as he used to  around the world, but in Stuttgart he gave a performance of _Ein  Kinderspiel_ [Child’s Play], seven short pieces for piano, which he  premiered at the keyboard in Toronto in 1982. They may be his among his  simplest works, written for his daughter Akiko, but as he pointed out  afterwards, though childlike and often playful, they are often too  tiring for children to perform, and certainly weren’t intended as  pedagogical exercises. They are thorough investigations into the  possibilities of piano resonance (a realm he has explored further in his  monumental _Ausklang_ for piano and orchestra) and he compared the  piece with Morton Feldman’s _The Viola in My Life_. _Ein  Kinderspiel_, he said, was ‘the piano in _my_ life, and at a  particular time as well’ – the piece belongs to a particular period of  experimentation with sound possibilities. His performance was crystal  clear – quite an achievement given the church acoustic – though he spoke  later of the difficulties in making such dense pieces work in this  acoustic. Ironically, only _Glockenturm_ [Bell Tower] of the  movements was really marred by the wet acoustic. The movement exists  more or less entirely in the varying resonances that emerge from a  chromatic cluster that remains constant throughout, but by the time the  cluster chord echoed away into the eaves, the altered resonance had also  flown its ivory nest.

The core of the evening’s programme was Lachenmann’s Second String  Quartet _Reigen seliger Geister_ performed by the Lotus Quartet on a  cross-shaped platform (no symbolism intended, I don’t think) in the  centre aisle of the church, with the performers at the cross’ tips  facing each other. Lachenmann spoke of the quartet as the ‘gradual  transformation from _flautato_ playing to _pizzicato_’, but a  purely technical analysis cannot do justice to the spiritual nature of  this ‘attempt at composition’. The opening passages return repeatedly to  the _scordatura_ open strings of the instruments, which Lachenmann  conceives more and more as a ‘super-instrument’ over the course of the  work. This return seems – despite the unconventional tuning – to hint at  more tuneful climes, perhaps purely through the open string timbre,  which for most of the time is shrouded by breathy, overtone-laden bow  strokes. This widens into an electric glittering of harmonic glissandi  that must be one of the single most beautiful passages in music of the  last 50 years. What follows might be seen as the real drama, where  dialectical processes are triggered and the transformation from bow to  hand takes place. One-by-one the players de-tune their strings and lower  their instruments to their knees to use what looked like old credit  cards to strum the strings – a passage in which Lachenmann treats the  quartet as a ‘super-guitar’. The drama here is palpable as the music’s  heartbeat slows almost to a standstill and occasional cracks and  crunches break a tense silence. The creaking of pews and the distant  tolling of the church bells (which in fact seemed to serve only to  heighten the atmosphere) were made palpable by the struggle to  anticipate the next sound. Here, a story Lachenmann had told earlier  about recording John Cage’s _4'33"_ with a class at the  Pädagogische Hochschule in Ludwigsburg seemed to resonate. He had asked  students to perform Cage’s piece and he recorded this performance. This  solicited two reactions: first some would laugh at the silence, but then  others began to listen. Once recorded, he played the class the tape of  the piece several times. Soon, they became aware of the sounds present  in the silence and the logic that connected them became clear. The  Ludwigsburg train would crescendo in and then out, there was the hum of  traffic, all sounds that we suppress from our conscious perception, but  once recorded and heard repeatedly began to be realised as music.

Fortunately, _Reigen seliger Geister_ need not be listened to  repeatedly to work its magic. After apparently shattering at the  listener’s feet, it gradually reassembles and glides upwards with a  gracious creaking before vanishing into a high breathing of violin  harmonics in an undeniably affecting conclusion. Sofia Gubaidulina has  written about the spiritual implications of upwards movement in music  and has categorized it as technique in her own music for symbolising the  movement towards heaven. She has even referred to Lachenmann’s music  when trying to explain her own conception of spirituality in music.   Lachenmann’s religious beliefs are something he has not touched on in  his extensive writings, though his early Marxist tendencies and skilful  avoidance of a question about church music from concert organiser Jörg  Hannes Hahn suggest they are certainly not straightforward, but the  subject of the Second String Quartet does incorporate spiritual elements  – the ‘seliger Geister’ of the title – and in the church context it was  hard to avoid a feeling that the work somehow revealed a transcendental  journey.

‘Some music is speech,’ Lachenmann later said, ‘Bach, Schoenberg or Boulez for example,’ but he would rather create music where what was  important was ‘observation’, where there was ‘no text, but a situation,  almost a meteorological situation’. He spoke of the string quartet as a  ‘walk, where the landscape gradually changes’ as we move through it and  then suddenly ‘the moment comes where one stands still, where one really  hears the landscape for the first time’. This moment in _Reigen  seliger Geister_ he pinpoints as the gentle scratch-tone bowing that  leads upwards and out of the piece (bb. 366 – 384). Lachenmann defines this as a moment that occurs in most of his works where the musical  material falls into a natural quasi-ostinato. He believes this moment is reached through a dialectical, almost organic process where the  material works through its implications towards a more or less  inevitable resting point (like an ordered thermodynamic system finding  its way back to its natural disorder). Despite this conception, the  process is never obvious nor does the music betray its eventual  destination; it is only on arrival that we perceive the origins of our  journey as leading inevitably to this point. Perhaps this is a bad case  of _post hoc, ergo propter hoc_ in the mind of the listener, but  the effect is undeniable. Lachenmann maintains that without the  preceding music these states would be nonsensical, like a tree, devoid  of ground to grow from, floating in the air. Despite all its  convention-flipping sounds, the music does possess an almost  Beethovenian logic. It is the musical-syntactical necessity of each and  every sound that binds the work together and it is this that makes us  hear music, not a scattering of strange effects for the ear’s  delectation. In a fashion similar to that of _musique concrète_,  sounds are liberated in an egalitarian system where no one sonic  attribute is given automatic preference (as pitch is in tonal systems);  sounds are treated as indivisible entities, whose components are  distinguishable in analysis, but to the ear function atomically. The  music lies in the alchemy, turning lead to gold.

The final two pieces of the evening’s programme were _Consolation I_ and _Consolation II_, two small-scale choral works from 1967 and  1968, performed with panache by singers from the Staatliche Hochschule  für Musik und Darstellende Kunst Stuttgart. Contemporary with some of  Luciano Berio’s experiments in phonetics, both these works demonstrate  an interest in disassembling their respective texts through phonetic  analysis that aims to reveal an inherent logic of sound construction. _Consolation  II_ is particularly effective in its setting of an 8th Century  prayer, the _Wessobrunner Gebet_:

> Mir gestand der Sterblichen Staunen als Höchstes \\
> Das  Erde nicht war, noch oben Himmel \\
> Noch Baum, noch irgend ein Berg  nicht war \\
> Noch die Sonne, nicht Licht war \\
> Noch der Mond nicht  leuchtete \\
> Noch das gewaltige Meer \\
> Da noch nirgends nichts war \\
> An  Enden und Wenden \\
> Da war der eine allmächtige Gott

This meditation on finding God in the nothingness before time is  dissolved into a shuddering landscape of letters, hissing with a hollow  wind, shivering with rolled ‘R’s, stuttering away into the nothingness  where God can perhaps be found, ending on the ‘t’ of ‘Gott’, not sung  but struck: two fingers coming together in a quiet clap.

Quiet, assured endings. No thunderclaps (though thunderous applause).  Bombast negated. Convention challenged. Where to next? ‘Composition  itself,’ reads Lachenmann’s programme note, ‘as a form of human seeking,  is flight […] a flight straight into the lion’s den. And therein lies  the only way out.’

<figure>
{% picture 2009/02/stuttgart_panorama1.jpg %}
<figcaption>The Schlossgarten in the centre of Stuttgart, which contains the State Opera House.</figcaption>
</figure>
