---
title: "Material Ethics and Musical Analysis"
category: text
digest: "A note on context, ethics, and the relational “object” of musical analysis."
featured_image: 2015/05/blanca-vinas-filmsoup.gif
featured_image_alt: Flashing analogue film frames, discoloured and liquid from chemical alteration.
featured_image_caption: Animated GIF by [Blanca Viñas](http://www.blancavinas.com/) (2016)
---
This text was written in the context of a “New Music Analysis” class. I am grateful for the input of my colleagues [Tamar Sella](https://www.tamarsella.com/), [Daniel Walden](http://www.danielwaldenpiano.com/), and [Etha Williams](https://harvard.academia.edu/EthaWilliams), who did their best to steer me in the right direction.
{: .previously-published }

Traditional music analysis makes some claims about what one ought properly to consider the object of analysis — what *thing* exists to be analysed. Most precisely, “music” (the tautological object of musical analysis) is considered as isolatable, an entity that can be separated from the world and manhandled, rather like the model scientific object of examination.[^1] In questioning this conception, and proposing some possibilities for the difficult reintegration of music into the world *for* analysis, I do so with the belief that music is not, as might perhaps be assumed, a material that is easily localisable — densely packed into the interwoven parameters of the printed score, or a sensual hunk of vibration and cognitive capacity — but that music lives in a metastasised condition, always active in the forming of multiple relations with a broad range of referents, which are both formed and impacted by the music, and which in return form and impact the music. Following the linguistic turn, cultural meaning and signification *are* (also) music. However, as we shall see, they are not *all* of music.

[^1]: This is arguably the case in a variety of analytical approaches, from those which are score-oriented — be that Schenkerian or pitch-class analyses — to those more recent attempts that take a scientific apprehension of sounds as their focus (psychoacoustics, music cognition, microtiming studies etc.)

In tackling the task of analysis, faced with understanding an assemblage of phenomena that include performance, composition, interpretation, communities of aesthetic sensibility and social exchange, I would like to suggest that work grouped loosely under the label “material feminisms,” but which has many precursors, tendrils and variations, might aid us in treating the object of analysis with a newfound sensitivity and openness. Material feminisms provide dynamic interpretations of the world by accepting to a large extent the achievements of poststructuralism’s linguistic turn, but arguing for a renewed engagement with the material of the world to counter poststructuralism’s continued repression of matter’s vital existence. In short, this is an argument for a hybrid apprehension of the world through a united body of language *and* matter. Matter is restored from its subaltern position as opposed to the Idea (as sublime, pure, immaterial), and becomes a vital agent in the world. As Claire Colebrook writes:

> When feminists turn to vitalism today, they do so with a full sense of the exhaustion and limits of the linguistic paradigm. The idea that the world is constructed through language merely repeats a centuries-old privilege of the formal and logical over the material. (2008, 52)

Susan Hekman makes a similar argument and, following Latour, assesses that “what we need now is not a return to a modernist conception of reality as an objective given, but rather an understanding of reality informed by all we have learned in the linguistic turn.” (2008, 88)

These theorists ask us to work hard to ensure we pay attention to matter, but this attention is not intended simply to flip a power relationship of idea over matter, indeed “it is crucial not to reinscribe it in reversed or inverted form” (Jones 2011, 42). Their calls are not recourses to Nature or essentialism, but rather to allow us to build a dynamic and inclusive constitution of the world, pointing out how an excessively linguistic approach can make it difficult to tackle a range of pressing issues from medical ethics to climate change (Alaimo and Hekman 2008, 4).[^2] In their hands, material feminisms are tools for tackling the subaltern position of the female and the corporeal, which can also be used to address injuries to a diverse variety of bodies. Under this paradigm we are encouraged to adopt a “material ethics,” a practice that is adaptive, flexible, non-dogmatic, responsive to the qualities and needs of our material environments. “Ethical practices — as opposed to ethical principles — do not seek to extend themselves over and above material realities, but instead emerge from them, taking into account multiple material consequences” (Alaimo and Hekman 2008, 7–8).

[^2]: In this context we might also reach for Sara Ahmed’s “sweaty concepts,” an idea which seeks to capture the way situations and (corporeal) experiences generate concepts, centering the effort and insistence required to produce a “sweaty concept,” and countering the assumption that the concept is a resident of purely cerebral and abstract worlds (Ahmed 2014).

To turn quickly to a musical concern: it seems that often we have an issue — when we are being analysts and more widely — with something ambiguously labelled as “context.” We are inclined to draw a bold line, dividing **M**usic — an object made of sound, perhaps paper, at a push acoustics — from **C**ontext — biography, society, culture, listening (which cannot possibly be as universalised as sometimes suggested), perhaps even agency itself. We debate Wagner and his antisemitism, but someone inevitably shouts “We have to separate man from music!” We criticise Schenker’s ardent German nationalism, but similarly claim “the ideology is in no way an essential component of the analytic practice” (Schachter 2001, 16). We are intent on being able to listen and shut out any unpleasantness, very hesitant to admit the obvious: that there *must* be some passage of material from author to authored.[^3] Even without an understanding of the observer effect in quantum mechanics,[^4] the idea that a human might be able to simultaneously create — form, transform, bring into being, shape, sculpt, mould, *birth* — a thing (music), and yet be separate from the thing created, apparently divided so utterly from it that the human’s body, behaviour, ideology, has no effect on the thing created, must be untrue. What can be debated, is the subtle flex and weave of the intersecting parts of the network of creation — all the constituting parts that have material influences on one another.

[^3]: Scholars of music are not alone in these problems as Avital Ronell’s *The Telephone Book* (1989) knowingly teases out with regards to Heidegger.

[^4]: Karen Barad’s groundbreaking work on quantum physics and the relationship between meaning and the material world is a key touchstone for much of this thinking (2007).

Presented with the request to tackle several works by Morton Feldman with the traditional tools of music analysis, one particular concern has been preoccupying me. It is more or less widely known (although relatively rarely spoken of) among those who knew Feldman that he was an open misogynist, propositioning female students, colleagues, and performers in various unpleasant ways. Late in 2014, Bunita Marcus — Feldman’s former student at the University at Buffalo and one of the few living composers he publicly praised — spoke out about both his plagiarism of her music, accusing him of “ransacking my melodies, harmonies, notations, compositional processes” in various works after 1976, including the *Piano and String Quartet*, and also the way he broke up her marriage and sought to isolate her (Bordignon and Marcus 2014). To those who know Marcus, it also became clear that abuse at the hands of various people from a young age had had a serious toll (Oteri 2010). Given Feldman’s lewd comments and informally documented sexism, even without knowledge of the details of the Feldman–Marcus relationship, one can assume that Feldman, at the very least, took advantage of a vulnerable individual at some point, an individual who in any case, as his student and a woman in the field of new music, was at the painful end of a significant power imbalance.

What, when asked for an **A**nalysis of music, are we to do with this information? It is troubling, because we hopefully recognise the incontrovertible importance of the knowledge of Morton Feldman’s behaviour and know it is difficult to reconcile with a culture that elevates his music without much thought for the man. Or rather, with thought for the idealised artist, and no thought for those he has hurt. We know that we are neither used to, nor good at, handling questions of overlap of artistry and biography. Some simple correlations might be accepted,[^5] but we know our tools are insufficient for untangling complex relationships and are afraid of the inevitable incompleteness of any interpretation. We also fear that any hybrid analysis of this type will inevitably lead to censorship or ideological blacklisting — that we might “lose” Wagner’s music, for example, to the weight of his biography and context. Evidently, the aim of an analysis that takes context seriously must be to unravel a nuanced and shifting web of relations, ensuring a broad range of circumstances are taken into consideration. It cannot be simply a tool for policing goods and bads (although some more policing in the present to make communities safer would be very welcome).

[^5]: For example, connections in the format of “lived in Alaska, vast open soundscapes” (John Luther Adams) or “liked long walks on the beach, stormy sea scenes” (Benjamin Britten) are fairly frequently drawn, but more nuanced understandings, especially where the autobiographical has negative implications for an already canonised artist, are far more rare.

One possibility, I’d like to suggest, is that aesthetic intentions and results, as present in a matrix of scores, writings, and audible music by Feldman, can be read alongside his “non-musical” behaviour, and in fact that his aesthetic decisions may in some way reflect a world view that also permitted the mistreatment of women in his life. Material ethics suggests it is important for an agent to take into consideration the response and demands of material beyond itself, to act with a tact and flexibility in negotiating with the world. In order to do this we also need to challenge an elevation of the conceptual, Platonic order of things and revalue the material conditions we find ourselves embedded in. By bifurcating the world into Idea and Matter, one half of the bifurcation always “becomes the privileged term and the other its suppressed, subordinated, negative counterpart,” and it is precisely those people and things whose bodies are under threat, who find themselves suffering from that subordination (Grosz 1994, 3).

In *Give My Regards to Eighth Street*, Feldman writes of his desire to make his sound “sourceless,” of his admiration for a composer “writing music not to be heard,” and of an “obliteration of the aural plane” (2000, 25). This desire is made explicit in *De Kooning*, the 1963 work for an ensemble of french horn, percussion, piano/celesta, violin, and cello. Feldman requests of the performers in his preface to the score “Each sound with a minimum of attack,” despite the material meaninglessness of this request for the pianist or certain of the percussionist’s actions. Similar disdain for the material conditions of performance in favour of a conceptual thread can be seen in the solo viola’s lone pizzicato in bar 50 of *The viola in my life (1)*. Every note of the viola part is marked with a crescendo, indicating a gentle, swelling entrance for each sound, and that extends to the arpeggiated pizzicato, which cannot possibly increase in dynamic following the attack. These details confirm what seems to hold true for perhaps the entire aesthetic Feldman characterises as that of the “departing landscape” — a desire to create a music free of bodies, pure and true in the Platonic sense, drifting aloof from material reality.

Is it possible that the artistic impulse to create such a music shares some roots in a character who felt it permissible to treat the bodies of others with a similar disdain? It seems plausible that a mesh of aesthetic sensibilities feeding into compositional decisions intersects with a mesh of erotic and psychological characteristics, and that this intersection is at very least in need of evaluation in the analytic process.

### Works Cited

- Ahmed, Sara. 2014. “Sweaty Concepts.” *Feministkilljoys* (blog). February 22, 2014. <https://feministkilljoys.com/2014/02/22/sweaty-concepts/>.
- Alaimo, Stacy, and Susan J. Hekman, eds. 2008. *Material Feminisms*. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Barad, Karen Michelle. 2007. *Meeting the Universe Halfway: Quantum Physics and the Entanglement of Matter and Meaning*. Durham, NC: Duke University Press.
- Bordignon, Filippo, and Bunita Marcus. 2014. “A Bunita Marcus, genio della Musica Colta.” *sentireascoltare*, December 4, 2014. <http://sentireascoltare.com/articoli/bunita-marcus-intervista-2014/>
- Colebrook, Claire. 2008. “On Not Becoming Man: The Materialist Politics of Unactualized Potential.” In Alaimo and Hekman 2008, 52–84.
- Feldman, Morton. 1963. *De Kooning*. New York: C.F. Peters.
- ———. 1972. *The viola in my life (1)*. New York: Universal Edition.
- ———. 2000. *Give My Regards to Eighth Street: Collected Writings of Morton Feldman*. Edited by B. H. Friedman. Cambridge, MA: Exact Change.
- Grosz, Elizabeth. 1994. *Volatile Bodies: Toward a Corporeal Feminism*. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.
- Hekman, Susan J. 2008. “Constructing the Ballast: An Ontology for Feminism.” In Alaimo and Hekman 2008, 85–119.
- Jones, Rachel. 2011. *Irigaray: Towards a Sexuate Philosophy*. Cambridge: Polity.
- Oteri, Frank J., and Bunita Marcus. 2010. “Who Is Bunita Marcus?” *NewMusicBox*, August 1, 2010. <http://www.newmusicbox.org/articles/who-is-bunita-marcus/>.
- Ronell, Avital. 1989. *The Telephone Book: Technology, Schizophrenia, Electric Speech*. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press.
- Schachter, Carl. 2001. “Elephants, Crocodiles, and Beethoven: Schenker’s Politics and the Pedagogy of Schenkerian Analysis.” *Theory and Practice*, xxvi, 1–20.
{: .bibliography}
